---
published: false
---
# Synergy in the NBA

When the 2016 Golden State Warriors, coming off its record 73 win season and subsequent Finals loss, added Kevin Durant, an arguably top fifteen player of all time, one of the greatest teams in NBA history was born. The Warriors would go on to win the next two championships and possibly would have won a third had it not been for injuries to Durant and Klay Thompson in the 2019 playoffs. But the Warriors' success was expected; the so-called 'Hamptons Five' lineup of Durant, Thompson, Stephen Curry, Draymond Green, and Andre Iguodala is perhaps the most stacked ever. Any of these Warriors teams winning a championship is like a Phillips Exeter Academy educated child from a wealthy New England family getting accepted to Harvard. We're more impressed when   the underprivileged kid gets into Harvard as the first in her family to attend college. This raises the question: which NBA teams have done the most with least?  

First, we must define what it means for a team to "have less" and "do more" than others. To "have less" is to have less talented players, and to "do more" is to achieve greater team success. We are trying to find the teams that are more than just the sum of their players. Such a team would consist of players who have modest individual skill, but gel well together as a team to produce better results than expected. In a word, we are looking for the teams with the most synergy.  

To measure the amount of talent a team has, I decided to look at a team's [RAPTOR WAR rating](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/how-our-raptor-metric-works/). RAPTOR (**R**obust **A**lgorithm using **P**layer **T**racking and **O**n/Off **R**atings) is a stat created by [FiveThirtyEight](https://fivethirtyeight.com) that measures the overall impact a player has by looking at player tracking and on/off data. The value of the statistic represents the number of points a player contributes to his team per 100 possessions compared to a league average player. For context, the 2020 regular season's leader in RAPTOR was James Harden with a rating of 10.5, meaning the Houston Rockets were expected to outscore opponents by 10.5 more points over 100 possessions if Harden was playing vs. an average player. An example of a league average player in 2020 was Kevin Love, with a RAPTOR of 0. A player's RAPTOR is used to calculate his wins above replacement, or WAR. WAR represents the number of wins a player contributes to his team over the course of a season relative to a replacement player, defined in this case by using data from players on the border between the NBA and the G League. WAR is derived from RAPTOR by also factoring in minutes played and pace of play. To quantify how much talent a team has, I took the sum of the WARs of each player on the team. I found the team WARs for every NBA team since 1977. According to this measure, the 2017 Golden State Warriors are the second most talented team of all time, trailing only Michael Jordan's 1996 Chicago Bulls. In fact, Jordan's Bulls and Curry's Warriors make up the entirity of the top five. If we look at the other extreme, we find the infamous 7 win 2012 Charlotte Bobcats placing last. Note that all statistics in this study only look at the regular season. 

To measure a team's performance, I simply used a team's net rating, the number of points a team outscores (or gets outscored by) opponents over 100 possessions. The '96 Bulls once again top this list with a net rating of 13.4, over a full point above the second place '97 Bulls. The '17 Warriors come third in this list with a net rating of 11.6 points. Interestingly, the fourth place team is the '16 San Antonio Spurs, perhaps the greatest team to never 